You don’t have to visit Denali National Park and Preserve to see the 20,310-foot peak. In fact, the odds of seeing it may be better in Talkeetna, about 100 miles south of the park entrance. At certain times of year, the skies are less overcast in Talkeetna, eliminating the clouds that often cloak the elusive mountain. And you may save money on food and accommodations in this rustic town, just 110 miles from Anchorage. That’s not to say you’ll regret visiting the park, which offers a wonderful wilderness experience. But if you’re rushed or on a tight budget, Talkeetna might make more sense for you. Among its pluses (besides its proximity to Anchorage): It’s a real year-round town, unlike Glitter Gulch, the pseudo-town outside the Denali park entrance whose hotels, restaurants and T-shirt shops are open only during the main tourist season, mid-May to mid-September. Talkeetna, a century-old railroad town, is often called the back door to Denali. Its log buildings, old and new, give it character and the Talkeetna Historical Society Museum honors the Native Americans, trappers, gold miners and aviators who once lived here. Flight-seeing trips, which take off from here and sometimes include landing on a glacier, start about $205 per person for a one-hour flight. Rafting, riverboat tours, mountain biking, hiking, camping and fishing are also available in the town, which is accessible by car or the Alaska Railroad (www.alaskarailroad.com), which is a three-hour trip and starts at $80 one way. If you have time for shopping, check out the core downtown area, a National Historic Site. Sit down to a breakfast of plate-size flapjacks at the Talkeetna Roadhouse, and visit Nagley’s General Store, which served miners and trappers for decades.  Another plus: You can rub shoulders with mountain climbers in Talkeetna, which is the main starting point for groups tackling the mountain. travel@latimes.com MORE: The newly renamed Denali is not as high as we thought At Denali National Park, sled dogs are truly rangers’ best friends At Alaska’s Denali National Park, the peak moments come wild and high 